[Illustration]




  LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 494
  Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

  Negro Life in
  New York’s Harlem

  A Lively Picture of a Popular and
  Interesting Section

  Wallace Thurman

  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
  GIRARD, KANSAS




  Copyright,
  Haldeman-Julius Company

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


        Page

     I. A Lively Picture of a Popular and Interesting Section      5

    II. 200,000 Negroes in Harlem                                 12

   III. The Social Life in Harlem                                 17

    IV. Night Life in Harlem                                      24

     V. The Amusement Life of Harlem                              35

    VI. House Rent Parties, Numbers and Hot Men                   40

   VII. The Negro and the Church                                  53

  VIII. Negro Journalism in Harlem                                58

    IX. The New Negro                                             61

     X. Harlem--Mecca of the New Negro                            63




NEGRO LIFE IN NEW YORK’S HARLEM




I. A LIVELY PICTURE OF A POPULAR AND INTERESTING SECTION

WALLACE THURMAN


Harlem has been called the Mecca of the New Negro, the center of black
America’s cultural renaissance, Nigger Heaven, Pickaninny Paradise,
Capitol of Black America, and various other things. It has been
surveyed and interpreted, explored and exploited. It has had its day in
literature, in the drama, even in the tabloid press. It is considered
the most popular and interesting section of contemporary New York.
Its fame is international; its personality individual and inimitable.
There is no Negro settlement anywhere comparable to Harlem, just as
there is no other metropolis comparable to New York. As the great south
side black belt of Chicago spreads and smells with the same industrial
clumsiness and stockyardish vigor of Chicago, so does the black belt
of New York teem and rhyme with the cosmopolitan cross currents of the
world’s greatest city. Harlem is Harlem because it is part and parcel
of greater New York. Its rhythms are the lackadaisical rhythms of a
transplanted minority group caught up and rendered half mad by the more
speedy rhythms of the subway, Fifth Avenue and the Great White Way.

Negro Harlem is located on one of the choice sites of Manhattan Island.
It covers the greater portion of the northwestern end, and is more
free from grime, smoke and oceanic dampness than the lower eastside
where most of the hyphenated American groups live. Harlem is a great
black city. There are no shanty-filled, mean streets. No antiquated
cobble-stoned pavement; no flimsy frame fire-traps. Little Africa has
fortressed itself behind brick and stone on wide important streets
where the air is plentiful and sunshine can be appreciated.

There are six main north and south thoroughfares streaming through
Negro Harlem--Fifth Avenue, Lenox Avenue, Seventh Avenue, Eighth
Avenue, Edgecombe and St. Nicholas. Fifth Avenue begins prosperously at
125th Street, becomes a slum district above 131st Street, and finally
slithers off into a warehouse-lined, dingy alleyway above 139th Street.
The people seen on Fifth Avenue are either sad or nasty looking.
The women seem to be drudges or drunkards, the men pugnacious and
loud--petty thieves and vicious parasites. The children are pitiful
specimens of ugliness and dirt.

The tenement houses in this vicinity are darkened dungheaps, festering
with poverty-stricken and crime-ridden step-children of nature. This
is the edge of Harlem’s slum district; Fifth Avenue is its board-walk.
Push carts line the curbstone, dirty push carts manned by dirtier
hucksters, selling fly-specked vegetables and other cheap commodities.
Evil faces leer at you from doorways and windows. Brutish men elbow
you out of their way, dreary looking women scowl at and curse children
playing on the sidewalk. That is Harlem’s Fifth Avenue.

Lenox Avenue knows the rumble of the subway and the rattle of the
crosstown street car. It is always crowded, crowded with pedestrians
seeking the subway or the street car, crowded with idlers from the many
pool halls and dives along its line of march, crowded with men and
women from the slum district which it borders on the west and Fifth
Avenue borders on the east. Lenox Avenue is Harlem’s Bowery. It is
dirty and noisy, its buildings ill-used, and made shaky by the subway
underneath. At 140th Street it makes its one bid for respectability.
On one corner there is Tabb’s Restaurant and Grill, one of Harlem’s
most delightful and respectable eating houses; across the street is
the Savoy building, housing a first-class dance hall, a motion picture
theater and many small business establishments behind its stucco front.
But above 141st Street Lenox Avenue gets mean and squalid, deprived of
even its crowds of people, and finally peters out into a dirt pile,
before leading to a car-barn at 147th St.

Seventh Avenue--Black Broadway--Harlem’s main street, a place to
promenade, a place to loiter, an avenue spacious and sleek with wide
pavement, modern well-kept buildings, theaters, drug stores and other
businesses. Seventh Avenue, down which no Negro dared walk twenty years
ago unless he was prepared to fight belligerent Irishmen. Seventh
Avenue, teeming with life and ablaze with color, the most interesting
and important street in one of the most interesting and important city
sections of greater New York.

Negro Harlem is best represented by Seventh Avenue. It is not, like
Fifth Avenue, filthy and stark, nor like Lenox, squalid and dirty. It
is a grand thoroughfare into which every element of Harlem population
ventures either for reasons of pleasure or of business. From 125th
Street to 145th Street, Seventh Avenue is a stream of dark people
going to churches, theaters, restaurants, billiard halls, business
offices, food markets, barber shops and apartment houses. Seventh
Avenue is majestic yet warm, and it reflects both the sordid chaos and
the rhythmic splendor of Harlem.

From five o’clock in the evening until way past midnight, Seventh
Avenue is one electric-lit line of brilliance and activity, especially
during the spring, summer and early fall months. Dwelling houses are
close, overcrowded and dark. Seventh Avenue is the place to seek
relief. People everywhere. Lines of people in front of the box offices
of the Lafayette Theater at 132d Street, the Renaissance motion picture
theater at 138th Street and the Roosevelt Theater at 145th Street.
Knots of people in front of the Metropolitan Baptist Church at 129th
Street and Salem M. E. Church, which dominates the corner at 129th
Street.

People going into the cabarets. People going into speak-easies and
saloons. Groups of boisterous men and boys, congregated on corners and
in the middle of the blocks, making remarks about individuals in the
passing parade. Adolescent boys and girls flaunting their youth. Street
speakers on every corner. A Hindoo faker here, a loud-voiced Socialist
there, a medicine doctor ballyhooing, a corn doctor, a blind musician,
serious people, gay people, philanderers and preachers. Seventh Avenue
is filled with deep rhythmic laughter. It is a civilized lane with
primitive traits, Harlem’s most representative street.

Eighth Avenue supports the elevated lines. It is noticeably negroid
only from 135th Street to 145th Street. It is packed with dingy, cheap
shops owned by Jews. Above 139th Street the curbstone is lined with
push-cart merchants selling everything from underwear to foodstuffs.
Eighth Avenue is dark and noisy. The elevated trestle and its shadows
dominate the street. Few people linger along its sidewalks. Eighth
Avenue is a street for business, a street for people who live west of
it to cross hurriedly in order to reach places located east of it.

Edgecombe, Brandhurst and St. Nicholas Avenues are strictly residential
thoroughfares of the better variety. Expensive modern apartment
houses line these streets. They were once occupied by well-to-do
white people who now live on Riverside Drive, West End Avenue and
in Washington Heights. They are luxuriously appointed with imposing
entrances, elevator service, disappearing garbage cans, and all the
other appurtenances that make a modern apartment house convenient. The
Negroes who live in these places are either high-salaried workingmen or
professional folk.

Most of the cross streets in Harlem, lying between the main north and
south thoroughfares, are monotonous and overcrowded. There is little
difference between any of them save that some are more dirty and more
squalid than others. They are lined with ordinary, undistinguished
tenement and apartment houses. Some are well kept, others are run
down. There are only four streets that are noticeably different, 136th
Street, 137th Street, 138th Street and 139th Street west of Seventh
Avenue and these are the only blocks in Harlem that can boast of having
shade trees. An improvement association organized by people living in
these streets, strives to keep them looking respectable.

Between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, is 139th Street, known among
Harlemites as “strivers’ row.” It is the most aristocratic street
in Harlem. Stanford White designed the houses for a wealthy white
clientele. Moneyed Negroes now own and inhabit them. When one lives on
“strivers’ row” one has supposedly arrived. Harry Wills resides there,
as do a number of the leading Babbitts and professional folk of Harlem.




II. 200,000 NEGROES IN HARLEM


There are approximately 200,000 Negroes in Harlem. Two hundred
thousand Negroes drawn from all sections of America, from Europe, the
West Indies, Africa, Asia, or where you will. Two hundred thousand
Negroes living, loving, laughing, crying, procreating and dying in
the segregated city section of Greater New York, about twenty-five
blocks long and seven blocks wide. Like all of New York, Harlem is
overcrowded. There are as many as 5,000 persons living in some single
blocks; living in dark, mephitic tenements, jammed together, brownstone
fronts, dingy elevator flats and modern apartment houses.

Living conditions are ribald and ridiculous. Rents are high and
sleeping quarters at a premium. Landlords profiteer and accept bribes,
putting out one tenant in order to house another willing to pay more
rent. Tenants, in turn, sublet and profiteer on roomers. People rent
a five-room apartment, originally planned for a small family, and
crowd two over-sized families into it. Others lease or buy a private
house and partition off spacious front and back rooms into two or
three parts. Hallways are curtained off and lined with cots. Living
rooms become triplex apartments. Clothes closets and washrooms become
kitchenettes. Dining rooms, parlors, libraries, drawing rooms are all
profaned by cots, day beds and snoring sleepers.

There is little privacy, little unused space. The man in the front
room of a railroad flat, so called because each room opens into the
other like coaches on a train, must pass through three other bedrooms
in order to reach the bathroom stuck on the end of the kitchen. He
who works nights will sleep by day in the bed of one who works days,
and vice versa. Mother and father sleep in a three-quarter bed. Two
adolescent children sleep on a portable cot set up in the parents’
bedroom. Other cots are dragged by night from closets and corners
to be set up in the dining room, in the parlor, or even in the
kitchen to accommodate the remaining members of the family. It is all
disconcerting, mad. There must be expansion. There is expansion, but
it is not rapid enough or continuous enough to keep pace with the
ever-growing population of Negro Harlem.

The first place in New York where Negroes had a segregated community
was in Greenwich Village, but as the years passed and their numbers
increased they soon moved northward into the twenties and lower
thirties west of Sixth Avenue until they finally made one big jump
and centered around west Fifty-third Street. About 1900, looking for
better housing conditions, a few Negroes moved to Harlem. The Lenox
Avenue subway had not yet been built and white landlords were having
difficulty in keeping white tenants east of Seventh Avenue because
of the poor transportation facilities. Being good businessmen they
eagerly accepted the suggestion of a Negro real estate agent that
these properties be opened to colored tenants. Then it was discovered
that the few houses available would not be sufficient to accommodate
the sudden influx. Negroes began to creep west of Lenox Avenue. White
property owners and residents began to protest and tried to find means
of checking or evicting unwelcome black neighbors. Negroes kept pouring
in. Negro capital, belligerently organized, began to buy all available
properties.

Then, to quote James Johnson, “the whole movement, in the eyes of the
whites, took on the aspect of an ‘invasion’; they became panic stricken
and began fleeing as from a plague. The presence of one colored
family in a block, no matter how well-bred and orderly, was sufficient
to precipitate a flight. House after house and block after block was
actually deserted. It was a great demonstration of human beings running
amuck. None of them stopped to reason why they were doing it or what
would happen if they didn’t. The banks and the lending companies
holding mortgages on these deserted houses were compelled to take them
over. For some time they held these houses vacant, preferring to do
that and carry the charges than to rent or sell them to colored people.
But values dropped and continued to drop until at the outbreak of the
war in Europe property in the northern part of Harlem had reached the
nadir.”

With the war came a critical shortage of common labor and the
introducing of thousands of southern Negroes into northern industrial
and civic centers. A great migration took place. Negroes were in
search of a holy grail. Southern Negroes, tired of moral and financial
blue days, struck out for the promised land, to seek adventure among
factories, subways and skyscrapers. New York, of course, has always
been a magnet for ambitious and adventurous Americans and foreigners.
New York to the Negro meant Harlem, and the great influx included
not only thousands of Negroes from every state in the Union, but also
over thirty thousand immigrants from the West Indian Islands and the
Caribbean regions. Harlem was the promised land.

Thanks to New York’s many and varied industries, Harlem Negroes
have been able to demand and find much work. There is a welcome and
profitable diversity of employment. Unlike Negroes in Chicago, or in
Pittsburgh, or in Detroit, no one industry is called upon to employ
the greater part of their population. Negroes have made money in New
York; Negroes have brought money to New York with them, and with this
money they have bought property, built certain civic institutions and
increased their business activities until their real estate holdings
are now valued at more than sixty million dollars.




III. THE SOCIAL LIFE OF HARLEM


The social life of Harlem is both complex and diversified. Here you
have two hundred thousand people collectively known as Negroes.
You have pure-blooded Africans, British Negroes, Spanish Negroes,
Portuguese Negroes, Dutch Negroes, Danish Negroes, Cubans, Porto
Ricans, Arabians, East Indians and black Abyssinian Jews in addition
to the racially well-mixed American Negro. You have persons of every
conceivable shade and color. Persons speaking all languages, persons
representative of many cultures and civilizations. Harlem is a magic
melting pot, a modern Babel mocking the gods with its cosmopolitan
uniqueness.

The American Negro predominates and, having adopted all of white
America’s prejudices and manners, is inclined to look askance at his
little dark-skinned brothers from across the sea. The Spanish Negro, i.
e., those Negroes hailing from Spanish possessions, stays to himself
and has little traffic with the other racial groups in his environment.
The other foreigners, with the exception of the British West Indians
are not large enough to form a separate social group and generally
become quickly identified with the regulation social life of the
community.

It is the Negro from the British West Indies who creates and has to
face a disagreeable problem. Being the second largest Negro Group in
Harlem, and being less susceptible to American manners and customs
than others, he is frowned upon and berated by the American Negro.
This intraracial prejudice is an amazing though natural thing. Imagine
a community made up of people universally known as oppressed, wasting
time and energy trying to oppress others of their kind, more recently
transplanted from a foreign clime. It is easy to explain. All people
seem subject to prejudice, even those who suffer from it most, and all
people seem inherently to dislike other folk who are characterized by
cultural and lingual differences. It is a failing of man, a curse of
humanity, and if these differences are accompanied, as they usually
are, by quarrels concerning economic matters, there is bound to be an
intensifying of the bitter antagonism existent between the two groups.
Such has been the case with the British West Indian in Harlem. Because
of his numerical strength, because of his cockney English inflections
and accent, because of his unwillingness to submit to certain American
do’s and don’ts, and because he, like most foreigners, has seemed
willing to work for low wages, he has been hated and abused by his
fellow-Harlemites. And, as a matter of protection, he has learned to
fight back.

It has been said that West Indians are comparable to Jews in that
they are “both ambitious, eager for education, willing to engage in
business, argumentative, aggressive, and possess a great proselytizing
zeal for any cause they espouse.” Most of the retail business in Harlem
is owned and controlled by West Indians. They are also well represented
and often officiate as provocative agents and leaders in radical
movements among Harlem Negroes. And it is obvious that the average
American Negro, in manifesting a dislike for the West Indian Negro,
is being victimized by that same delusion which he claims blinds the
American white man; namely, that all Negroes are alike. There are some
West Indians who are distasteful; there are some of all people about
whom one could easily say the same thing.

It is to be seen then that all this widely diversified population would
erect an elaborate social structure. For instance, there are thousands
of Negroes in New York from Georgia. These have organized themselves
into many clubs, such as the Georgia Circle or the Sons of Georgia.
People from Virginia, South Carolina, Florida and other states do
likewise. The foreign contingents also seem to have a mania for social
organization. Social clubs and secret lodges are legion. And all of
them vie with one another in giving dances, parties, entertainments and
benefits in addition to public turnouts and parades.

Speaking of parades, one must mention Marcus Garvey. Garvey, a
Jamaican, is one of the most widely known Negroes in contemporary life.
He became notorious because of his Back-to-Africa campaign. With the
West Indian population of Harlem as a nucleus, he enlisted the aid of
thousands of Negroes all over America in launching the Black Star Line,
the purpose of which was to establish a trade and travel route between
America and Africa by and for Negroes. He also planned to establish
a black empire in Africa of which he was to be emperor. The man’s
imagination and influence were colossal; his manifestations of these
qualities often ridiculous and adolescent, though they seldom lacked
color and interest.

Garvey added much to the gaiety and life of Harlem with his parades.
Garmented in a royal purple robe with crimson trimmings and an
elaborate headdress, he would ride in state down Seventh Avenue in an
open limousine, surrounded and followed by his personal cabinet of
high chieftains, ladies in waiting and protective legion. Since his
incarceration in Atlanta Federal prison on a charge of having used the
mails to defraud, Harlem knows no more such spectacles. The street
parades held now are uninteresting and pallid when compared to the
Garvey turnouts, brilliantly primitive as they were.

In addition to the racial and territorial divisions of the social
structure there are also minor divisions determined by color and
wealth. First there are the “dictys,” that class of Negroes who
constitute themselves as the upper strata and have lately done much
wailing in the public places because white and black writers have
seemingly overlooked them in their delineations of Negro life in
Harlem. This upper strata is composed of the more successful and more
socially inclined professional folk--lawyers, doctors, dentists,
druggists, politicians, beauty parlor proprietors and real estate
dealers. They are for the most part mulattoes of light brown skin and
have succeeded in absorbing all the social mannerisms of the white
American middle class. They live in the stately rows of houses on 138th
and 139th Streets between Seventh and Eighth Avenues or else in the
“high-tone” apartment houses on Edgecombe and St. Nicholas. They are
both stupid and snobbish as is their class in any race. Their most
compelling if sometimes unconscious ambition is to be as near white as
possible, and their greatest expenditure of energy is concentrated on
eradicating any trait or characteristic commonly known as negroid.

Their homes are expensively appointed and comfortable. Most of them are
furnished in good taste, thanks to the interior decorator who was hired
to do the job. Their existence is one of smug complacence. They are
well satisfied with themselves and with their class. They are without a
doubt the basic element from which the Negro aristocracy of the future
will evolve. They are also good illustrations, mentally, sartorially
and socially, of what the American standardizing machine can do to
susceptible material.

These people have a social life of their own. They attend formal
dinners and dances, resplendent in chic expensive replicas of Fifth
Avenue finery. They arrange suitable inter-coterie weddings, preside
luxuriously at announcement dinners, pre-nuptial showers, wedding
breakfasts and the like. They attend church socials, fraternity dances
and sorority gatherings. They frequent the downtown theaters, and
occasionally, quite occasionally, drop into one of the Harlem night
clubs which certain of their lower caste brethren frequent and white
downtown excursionists make wealthy.

Despite this upper strata which is quite small, social barriers among
Negroes are not as strict and well regulated in Harlem as they are
in other Negro communities. Like all cosmopolitan centers Harlem is
democratic. People associate with all types should chance happen
to throw them together. There are a few aristocrats, a plethora of
striving bourgeoisie, a few artistic spirits and a great proletarian
mass, which constitutes the most interesting and important element in
Harlem, for it is this latter class and their institutions that gives
the community its color and fascination.




IV. NIGHT LIFE IN HARLEM


Much has been written and said about night life in Harlem. It has
become the _leit motif_ of sophisticated conversation and shop girl
intimacies. To call yourself a New Yorker you must have been to Harlem
at least once. Every up-to-date person knows Harlem, and knowing Harlem
generally means that one has visited a night club or two. These night
clubs are now enjoying much publicity along with the New Negro and
Negro art. They are the shrines to which white sophisticates, Greenwich
Village artists, Broadway revellers and provincial commuters make
eager pilgrimage. In fact, the white patronage is so profitable and so
abundant that Negroes find themselves crowded out and even segregated
in their own places of jazz.

There are, at the present time, about one dozen of these night clubs
in Harlem--Bamville, Connie’s Inn, Baron Wilkins, The Nest, Small’s
Paradise, The Capitol, The Cotton Club, The Green Cat, The Sugar Cane
Club, Happy Rhones, The Hoofers Club and the Little Savoy. Most of
these generally have from two to ten white persons for every black
one. Only The Hoofers, The Little Savoy, and The Sugar Cane Club seem
to cater almost exclusively to Negro trade.

At the Bamville and at Small’s Paradise, one finds smart white patrons,
the type that reads the ultrasophisticated _New Yorker_. Indeed, that
journal says in its catalogue of places to go--“Small’s and Bamville
are the show places of Harlem for downtowners on their first excursion.
Go late. Better not to dress.” And so the younger generation of
Broadway, Park Avenue, Riverside Drive, Third Avenue and the Bronx
go late, take their own gin, applaud the raucous vulgarity of the
entertainers, dance with abandon and go home with a headache. They have
seen Harlem.

The Cotton Club and Connie’s Inn make a bid for theatrical performers
and well-to-do folk around town. The Nest and Happy Rhones attract
traveling salesmen, store clerks and commuters from Jersey and Yonkers.
The Green Cat has a large Latin clientele. Baron Wilkins draws
glittering ladies from Broadway with their sleek gentlemen friends.
Because of these conditions of invasion, Harlem’s far-famed night clubs
have become merely side shows staged for sensation-seeking whites.
Nevertheless, they are still an egregious something to experience.
Their smoking cavernous depths are eerie and ecstatic. Patrons enter,
shiver involuntarily, then settle down to be shoved about and scared by
the intangible rhythms that surge all around them. White night clubs
are noisy. White night clubs affect weird music, soft light, Negro
entertainers and dancing waiters, but, even with all these contributing
elements, they cannot approximate the infectious rhythm and joy always
found in a Negro cabaret.

Take the Sugar Cane Club on Fifth Avenue near 135th Street, located
on the border of the most “low-down” section of Harlem. This place is
visited by few whites or few “dicty” Negroes. Its customers are the
rough-and-ready, happy-go-lucky more primitive type--street walkers,
petty gamblers and pimps, with an occasional adventurer from other
strata of society.

The Sugar Cane Club is a narrow subterranean passageway about
twenty-five feet wide and 125 feet long. Rough wooden tables,
surrounded by rough wooden chairs, and the orchestra stands, jammed
into the right wall center, use up about three-quarters of the space.
The remaining rectangular area is bared for dancing. With a capacity
for seating about one hundred people, it usually finds room on gala
nights for twice that many. The orchestra weeps and moans and groans
as only an unsophisticated Negro jazz orchestra can. A blues singer
croons vulgar ditties over the tables to individual parties or else
wah-wahs husky syncopated blues songs from the center of the floor.
Her act over, the white lights are extinguished, red and blue spot
lights are centered on the diminutive dancing space, couples push back
their chairs, squeeze out from behind the tables and from against the
wall, then finding one another’s bodies, sweat gloriously together,
with shoulders hunched, limbs obscenely intertwined and hips wiggling;
animal beings urged on by liquor and music and physical contact.

Small’s Paradise, on Seventh Avenue near 135th Street, is just the
opposite of the Sugar Cane Club. It caters almost exclusively to white
trade with just enough Negroes present to give the necessary atmosphere
and “difference.” Yet even in Small’s with its symphonic orchestra,
full-dress appearance and dignified onlookers, there is a great deal of
that unexplainable, intangible rhythmic presence so characteristic of a
Negro cabaret.

In addition to the well-known cabarets, which are largely show
places to curious whites, there are innumerable places--really
speak-easies--which are open only to the initiate. These places are
far more colorful and more full of spontaneous joy than the larger
places to which one has ready access. They also furnish more thrills to
the spectator. This is possible because the crowd is more select, the
liquor more fiery, the atmosphere more intimate and the activities of
the patrons not subject to be watched by open-mouthed white people from
downtown and the Bronx.

One particular place known as the Glory Hole is hidden in a musty damp
basement behind an express and trucking office. It is a single room
about ten feet square and remains an unembellished basement except for
a planed down plank floor, a piano, three chairs and a library table.
The Glory Hole is typical of its class. It is a social club, commonly
called a dive, convenient for the high times of a certain group. The
men are unskilled laborers during the day, and in the evenings they
round up their girls or else meet them at the rendezvous in order to
have what they consider and enjoy as a good time. The women, like the
men, swear, drink and dance as much and as vulgarly as they please.
Yet they do not strike the observer as being vulgar. They are merely
being and doing what their environment and their desire for pleasure
suggest.

Such places as the Glory Hole can be found all over the so-called “bad
lands” of Harlem. They are not always confined to basement rooms. They
can be found in apartment flats, in the rear of barber shops, lunch
counters, pool halls, and other such conveniently blind places. Each
one has its regular quota of customers with just enough new patrons
introduced from time to time to keep the place alive and prosperous.
These intimate, low-down civic centers are occasionally misjudged.
Social service reports damn them with the phrase “breeding places of
vice and crime.” They may be. They are also good training grounds for
prospective pugilists. Fights are staged with regularity and with
vigor. And most of the regular customers have some mark on their faces
or bodies that can be displayed as having been received during a battle
in one of the glory holes.

The other extreme of amusement places in Harlem is exemplified by
the Bamboo Inn, a Chinese-American restaurant that features Oriental
cuisine, a jazz band and dancing. It is the place for select Negro
Harlem’s night life, the place where debutantes have their coming out
parties, where college lads take their co-eds and society sweethearts
and where dignified matrons entertain. It is a beautifully decorated
establishment, glorified by a balcony with booths, and a large
gyroflector, suspending from the center of the ceiling, on which
colored spotlights play, flecting the room with triangular bits
of vari-colored light. The Bamboo Inn is _the_ place to see “high
Harlem,” just like the Glory Hole is _the_ place to see “low Harlem.”
Well-dressed men escorting expensively garbed women and girls; models
from Vanity Fair with brown, yellow and black skins. Doctors and
lawyers, Babbitts and their ladies with fine manners (not necessarily
learned through Emily Post), fine clothes and fine homes to return to
when the night’s fun has ended.

The music plays. The gyroflector revolves. The well-bred, polite
dancers mingle on the dance floor. There are a few silver hip flasks.
There is an occasional burst of too-spontaneous-for-the-environment
laughter. The Chinese waiters slip around, quiet and bored. A big
black-face bouncer, arrayed in tuxedo, watches eagerly for some too
boisterous, too unconventional person to put out. The Bamboo Inn
has only one blemishing feature. It is also the rendezvous for a set
of oriental men who favor white women, and who, with their pale face
partners, mingle with Harlem’s four hundred.

When Harlem people wish to dance, without attending a cabaret, they
go to the Renaissance Casino or to the Savoy, Harlem’s two most
famous public dance halls. The Savoy is the pioneer in the field of
giving dance-loving Harlemites some place to gather nightly. It is
an elaborate ensemble with a Chinese garden (Negroes seem to have a
penchant for Chinese food--there are innumerable Chinese restaurants
all over Harlem), two orchestras that work in relays, and hostesses
provided at twenty-five cents per dance for partnerless young men.
The Savoy opens at three in the afternoon and closes at three in the
morning. One can spend twelve hours in this jazz palace for sixty-five
cents, and the price of a dinner or an occasional sustaining sandwich
and drink. The music is good, the dancers are gay, and the setting is
conducive to joy.

The Renaissance Casino was formerly a dance hall, rented out only for
social affairs, but when the Savoy began to flourish, the Renaissance,
after closing a while for redecorations, changed its policy and
reopened as a public dance hall. It has no lounging room or Chinese
garden, but it stages a basket ball game every Sunday night that is
one of the most popular amusement institutions in Harlem, and it has
an exceptionally good orchestra, comfortable sitting-out places and a
packed dance floor nightly.

Then, when any social club wishes to give a dance at the Renaissance,
the name of the organization is flashed from the electric signboard
that hangs above the entrance and in return for the additional and
assured crowd, some division of the door receipts is made. The
Renaissance is, I believe, in good Harlemese, considered more “dicty”
than the Savoy. It has a more regulated and more dignified clientele,
and almost every night in the week the dances are sponsored by some
well-known social group.

In addition to the above two places, the Manhattan Casino, an elaborate
dance palace, is always available for the more de luxe gatherings.
It is at the Manhattan Casino that the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People has its yearly whist tournament and
dance, that Harlem society folk have their charity balls, and select
formals, and that the notorious Hamilton Lodge holds its spectacular
masquerade each year.

All of the dances held in this Casino are occasions never to be
forgotten. Hundreds of well-dressed couples dancing on the floor.
Hundreds of Negroes of all types and colors, mingling together on the
dance floor, gathering in the boxes, meeting and conversing on the
promenade. And here and there an occasional white person, or is it a
Negro who can “pass”?

Negroes love to dance, and in Harlem where the struggle to live is
so intensely complex, the dance serves as a welcome and feverish
outlet. Yet it is strange that none of these dance palaces are owned
or operated by Negroes. The Renaissance Casino was formerly owned by
a syndicate of West Indians, but has now fallen into the hands of
a Jewish group. And despite the thousands of dollars Negroes spend
in order to dance, the only monetary returns in their own community
are the salaries paid to the Negro musicians, ushers, janitors and
door-men. The rest of the profits are spent and exploited outside of
Harlem.

This is true of most Harlem establishments. The Negro in Harlem is
not, like the Negro in Chicago and other metropolitan centers, in
charge of the commercial enterprises located in his community. South
State Street in Chicago’s great Black belt, is studded with Negro
banks, Negro office buildings, housing Negro insurance companies,
manufacturing concerns, and other major enterprises. There are no
Negro controlled banks in Harlem. There are only branches of downtown
Manhattan’s financial institutions, manned solely by whites and
patronized almost exclusively by Negroes. Harlem has no outstanding
manufacturing concern like the Overton enterprises in Chicago, the
Poro school and factory in St. Louis, or the Madame Walker combine in
Indianapolis. Harlem Negroes own over sixty million dollars worth of
real estate, but they neither own nor operate one first-class grocery
store, butchershop, dance hall, theater, clothing store or saloon. They
do invest their money in barber shops, beauty parlors, pool halls,
tailor shops, restaurants and lunch counters.




V. THE AMUSEMENT LIFE OF HARLEM


Like most good American communities the movies hold a primary position
in the amusement life of Harlem. There are seven neighborhood motion
picture houses in Negro Harlem proper, and about six big time cinema
palaces on 125th Street that have more white patronage than black, yet
whose audiences are swelled by movie fans from downtown.

The picture emporiums of Harlem are comparable to those in any
residential neighborhood. They present second and third run features
with supporting bills of comedies, novelties, and an occasional special
performance when the management presents a bathing beauties contest, a
plantation jubilee, an amateur ensemble and other vaudeville stunts.
The Renaissance Theater, in the same building with the Renaissance
Casino, is the cream of Harlem motion picture houses. It, too, was
formerly owned and operated by Negroes, the only one of its kind in
Harlem. Now Negroes only operate it. The Renaissance attracts the
more select movie audiences; it has a reputable symphony orchestra,
a Wurlitzer organ, and presents straight movies without vaudeville
flapdoodle. It is spacious and clean and free from disagreeable odors.

The Roosevelt Theater, the New Douglas, and the Savoy are less
aristocratic competitors. They show the same pictures as the
Renaissance, but seem to be patronized by an entirely different set
of people, and, although their interiors are more spacious, they are
not as well decorated or as clean as the Renaissance. They attract a
set of fresh youngsters, smart aleck youths and lecherous adult males
who attend, not so much to see the picture as to pick up a susceptible
female or to spoon with some girl they have picked up elsewhere. The
places are also frequented by family groups, poor but honest folk, who
cannot afford other forms or places of amusement.

The Franklin and the Gem are the social outcasts of the group. Their
audiences are composed almost entirely of loafers from the low-grade
pool rooms and dives in their vicinity, and tenement-trained drudges
from the slums. The stench in these two places is nauseating. The Board
of Health rules are posted conspicuously, admonishing patrons not to
spit on the floor or to smoke in the auditorium, but the aisle is
slippery with tobacco spew and cigarette smoke adds to the density of
the foul air. The movies flicker on the screen, some wild west picture
three or four years old, dirty babies cry in time with the electric
piano that furnishes the music, men talk out loud, smoke, spit, and
drop empty gin or whiskey bottles on the floor when emptied.

All of these places from the Renaissance to the Gem are open daily
from two in the afternoon until eleven at night, and save for a lean
audience during the supper hour are usually filled to capacity.
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays are harvest times, and the Jewish
representatives of the chain to which a theater belongs walk around
excitedly and are exceedingly gracious, thinking no doubt of the
quarters that are being deposited at the box office.

The Lafayette and Lincoln theaters are three-a-day combination movie
and musical comedy revue houses. The Lafayette used to house a local
stock company composed of all Negro players, but it has now fallen into
less dignified hands. Each week it presents a new revue. These revues
are generally weak-kneed, watery variations on downtown productions.
If Earl Carroll is presenting Artists and Models on Broadway, the
Lafayette presents Brown Skin Models in Harlem soon afterwards. Week
after week one sees same type of “high yaller” chorus, hears the same
blues songs, and applauds different dancers doing the same dance steps.
There is little originality on the part of the performers, and seldom
any change of fare. Cheap imitations of Broadway successes, nudity,
vulgar dances and vulgar jokes are the box office attractions.

On Friday nights there is a midnight show, which is one of the most
interesting spectacles in Harlem. The performance begins some time
after midnight and lasts until four or four-thirty the next morning.
The audience is as much if not more interesting and amusing than the
performers on the stage. Gin bottles are carried and passed among
groups of friends. Cat calls and hisses attend any dull bit. Outspoken
comments punctuate the lines, songs and dances of the performers.
Impromptu acts are staged in the orchestra and in the gallery. The
performers themselves are at their best and leave the stage to make
the audience a part of their act. There are no conventions considered,
no reserve is manifested. Everyone has a jolly good time, and after
the theater there are parties or work according to the wealth and
inclinations of the individual.

The Lincoln theater is smaller and more smelly than the Lafayette,
and most people who attend the latter will turn up their noses at the
Lincoln. It too has revues and movies, and its only distinguishing
feature is that its shows are even worse than those staged at the
Lafayette. They are so bad that they are ludicrously funny. The
audience is comparable to that found in the Lafayette on Friday nights
at the midnight jamboree. Performers are razzed. Chorus girls are
openly courted or damned, and the spontaneous utterances of the patrons
are far more funny than any joke the comedians ever tell. If one can
stand the stench, one can have a good time for three hours or more just
by watching the unpredictable and surprising reactions of the audience
to what is being presented on the stage.




VI. HOUSE RENT PARTIES, NUMBERS AND HOT MEN


The Harlem institutions that intrigue the imagination and stimulate the
most interest on the part of an investigator are House Rent Parties,
Numbers and Hot Men. House Rent parties are the result of high rents.
Private houses containing nine or ten or twelve rooms rent from $185
up to $250 per month. Apartments are rated at $20 per room or more,
according to the newness of the building and the conveniences therein.
Five-room flats, located in walk-up tenements, with inside rooms, dark
hallways and dirty stairs rent for $10 per room or more. It can be seen
then that when the average Negro workingman’s salary is considered (he
is often paid less for his labors than a white man engaged in the same
sort of work), and when it is also considered that he and his family
must eat, dress and have some amusements and petty luxuries, these
rents assume a criminal enormity. And even though every available bit
of unused space is sublet at exorbitant rates to roomers, some other
source of revenue is needed when the time comes to meet the landlord.

Hence we have hundreds of people opening their apartments and houses
to the public, their only stipulation being that the public pay
twenty-five cents admission fee and buy plentifully of the food and
drinks offered for sale. Although one of these parties can be found
any time during the week, Saturday night is favored. The reasons are
obvious; folk don’t have to get up early on Sunday morning and most of
them have had a pay day.

Of course, this commercialization of spontaneous pleasure in order
to pay the landlord has been abused, and now there are folk who make
their living altogether by giving alleged House Rent Parties. This is
possible because there are in Harlem thousands of people with no place
to go, thousands of people lonesome, unattached and cramped, who stroll
the streets eager for a chance to form momentary contacts, to dance,
to drink and make merry. They willingly part with more of the week’s
pay than they should just to enjoy an oasis in the desert of their
existence and a joyful intimate party, open to the public yet held in a
private home, is, as they say, “their meat.”

So elaborate has the technique of these parties and their promotion
become that great competition has sprung up between prospective party
givers. Private advertising stunts are resorted to, and done quietly so
as not to attract too much attention from the police, who might want
to collect a license fee or else drop in and search for liquor. Cards
are passed out in pool halls, subway stations, cigar stores, and on the
street. This is an example:

  Hey! Hey!
  Come on boys and girls let’s shake
  that thing
  Where?
  At
  Hot Poppa Sam’s
  West 134th Street, three flights up.
  Jelly Roll Smith at the piano
  Saturday night, May 7, 1927
  Hey! Hey!

Saturday night comes. There may be only piano music, there may be a
piano and drum, or a three or four-piece ensemble. Red lights, dim and
suggestive, are in order. The parlor and the dining room are cleared
for the dance, and one bedroom is utilized for hats and coats. In the
kitchen will be found boiled pigs feet, ham hock and cabbage, hopping
John (a combination of peas and rice), and other proletarian dishes.

The music will be barbarous and slow. The dancers will use their bodies
and the bodies of their partners without regard to the conventions.
There will be little restraint. Happy individuals will do solo
specialties, will sing, dance--have Charleston and Black Bottom
contests and breakdowns. Hard little tenement girls will flirt and make
dates with Pool Hall Johnnies and drug store cowboys. Prostitutes will
drop in and slink out. And in addition to the liquor sold by the house,
flasks of gin, and corn and rye will be passed around and emptied. Here
“low” Harlem is in its glory, primitive and unashamed.

I have counted as many as twelve such parties in one block, five in
one apartment house containing forty flats. They are held all over
Harlem with the possible exception of 137th, 138th and 139th Streets
between Seventh and Eighth Avenues where the bulk of Harlem’s upper
class lives. Yet the house rent party is not on the whole a vicious
institution. It serves a real and vital purpose, and is as essential to
“low Harlem” as the cultured receptions and soirees held on “strivers’
row” are to “high Harlem.”

House rent parties have their evils; it is an economic evil and a
social evil that makes them necessary, but they also have their
virtues. Like all other institutions of man it depends upon what
perspective you view them from. But regardless of abstract matters,
house rent parties do provide a source of revenue to those in
difficult financial straits, and they also give lonesome Harlemites,
caged in by intangible bars, some place to have their fun and forget
problems of color, civilization and economics.

Numbers, unlike house rent parties, is not an institution confined
to any one class of Harlem folk. Almost everybody plays the numbers,
a universal and illegal gambling pastime, which has become Harlem’s
favorite indoor sport.

Numbers is one of the most elaborate, big-scale lottery games in
America. It is based on the digits listed in the daily reports of the
New York stock exchange. A person wishing to play the game places a
certain sum of money, from one penny up, on a number composed of three
digits. This number must be placed in the hands of a runner before ten
o’clock in the morning as the reports are printed in the early editions
of the afternoon papers. The clearing house reports are like this:

  Exchanges      $1,023,000,000
  Balances          128,000,000
  Credit Bal.        98,000,000

The winning number is composed from the second and third digits in the
millionth figures opposite exchanges and from the third figure in the
millionth place opposite the balances. Thus if the report is like the
example above, the winning number for that day will be 238.

An elaborate system of placement and paying off has grown around this
game. Hundreds of persons known as runners make their rounds daily,
collecting number slips and cash placements from their clients. These
runners are the middle men between the public and the banker, who pays
the runner a commission on all collections, reimburses winners, if
there are any, and also gives the runner a percentage of his client’s
winnings.

These bankers and runners can well afford to be and often are rogues.
Since numbers is an illegal pastime, they can easily disappear when the
receipts are heavy or a number of people have chosen the correct three
digits and wish their winnings. The police are supposed to make some
effort to enforce the law and check the game. Occasionally a runner
or a banker is arrested, but this generally occurs only when some
irate player notifies the police that he “aint been done right by.”
Numbers can be placed in innumerable ways, the grocer, the butcher, the
confectioner, the waitress at the lunch counter, the soda clerk, and
the choir leader all collect slips for the number bankers.

People look everywhere for a number to play. The postman passes, some
addict notes the number on his cap and puts ten cents on it for that
day. A hymn is announced by the pastor in church and all the members
in the congregation will note the number for future reference. People
dream, each dream is a symbol for a number that can be ascertained by
looking in a dream book for sale at all Harlem newsstands. Street car
numbers, house numbers, street numbers, chance calculations--anything
that has figures on it or connected with it will give some player a
good number, and inspire him to place much money on it.

There is slight chance to win, it is a thousand to one shot, and yet
this game and its possible awards have such a hold on the community
that it is often the cause for divorce, murder, scanty meals,
dispossess notices and other misfortunes. Some player makes a “hit” for
one dollar, and receives five hundred and forty dollars. Immediately
his acquaintances and neighbors are in a frenzy and begin staking large
sums on any number their winning friend happens to suggest.

It is all a game of chance. There is no way to figure out
scientifically or otherwise what digits will be listed in the clearing
house reports. Few people placing fifty cents on No. 238 stop to
realize now many other combinations of three digits are liable to win.
One can become familiar with the market’s slump days and fat days, but
even then the digits which determine the winning number could be almost
anything.

People who are moral in every other respect, church going folk, who
damn drinking, dancing, or gambling in any other form, will play the
numbers. For some vague reason this game is not considered as gambling,
and its illegality gives little concern to any one--even to the Harlem
police, who can be seen slipping into a corner cigar store to place
their number for the day with an obliging and secretive clerk.

As I write a friend of mine comes in with a big roll of money, $540. He
has made a “hit.” I guess I will play fifty cents on the number I found
stamped inside the band of my last year’s straw hat.

Stroll down Seventh Avenue on a spring Sunday afternoon. Everybody
seems to be well dressed. The latest fashions prevail, and though there
are the usual number of folk attired in outlandish color combinations
and queer styles, the majority of the promenaders are dressed in good
taste. In the winter, expensive fur coats swathe the women of Harlem’s
Seventh Avenue as they swathe the pale face fashionplates on Fifth
Avenue down town, while the men escorting them are usually sartorially
perfect.

How is all this well-ordered finery possible? Most of these people
are employed as menials--dish washers, elevator operators, porters,
waiters, red caps, longshoremen, and factory hands. Their salaries
are notoriously low, not many men picked at random on Seventh Avenue
can truthfully say that they regularly earn more than $100 per month,
and from this salary must come room rent, food and other of life’s
necessities and luxuries. How can they dress so well?

There are, of course, the installment houses, considered by many
authorities one of the main economic curses of our present day
civilization, and there are numerous people who run accounts at such
places just to keep up a front, but these folk have little money
to jingle in their pockets. All of it must be dribbled out to the
installment collectors. There was even one chap I knew, who had to
pawn a suit he had bought on the installment plan in order to make the
final ten dollar payment and prevent the credit house collector from
garnisheeing his wages. And it will be found that the majority of the
Harlemites, who must dress well on a small salary, shun the installment
house leechers and patronize the “hot men.”

“Hot men” sell “hot stuff,” which when translated from Harlemese into
English, means merchandise supposedly obtained illegally and sold on
the q. t. far below par. “Hot men” do a big business in Harlem. Some
have apartments fitted out as showrooms, but the majority peddle their
goods piece by piece from person to person.

“Hot stuff” is supposedly stolen by shoplifters or by store employes or
by organized gangs, who raid warehouses and freight yards. Actually,
most of the “hot stuff” sold in Harlem originally comes from bankrupt
stores. Some ingenious group of people make a practice of attending
bankruptcy sales and by buying blocks of merchandise get a great deal
for a small sum of money. This merchandise is then given in small lots
to various agents in Harlem, who secretly dispose of it.

There is a certain glamour about buying stolen goods aside from their
cheapness. Realizing this, “hot men” and their agents maintain that
their goods are stolen whether they are or not. People like to feel
that they are breaking the law and when they are getting undeniable
bargains at the same time, the temptation becomes twofold. Of course,
one never really knows whether what they are buying has been stolen
from a neighbor next door or bought from a defunct merchant. There
have been many instances when a gentleman, strolling down the avenue
in a newly acquired overcoat, has had it recognized by a former owner,
and found himself either beaten up or behind the bars. However, such
happenings are rare, for the experienced Harlemite will buy only that
“hot stuff” which is obviously not second-hand.

One evening I happened to be sitting in one of the private reception
rooms of the Harlem Y. W. C. A. There was a great commotion in the
adjoining room, a great coming in and going out. It seemed as if every
girl in the Y. W. C. A. was trying to crowd into that little room.
Finally the young lady I was visiting went to investigate. She was gone
for about fifteen minutes. When she returned she had on a new hat,
which she informed me, between laughs at the bewildered expressions on
my face, she had obtained from a “hot man” for two dollars. This same
hat, according to her, would cost $10 downtown and $12 on 125th Street.

I placed my chair near the door and watched the procession of young
women entering the room bareheaded and leaving with new head gear.
Finally the supply was exhausted and a perspiring little Jew emerged,
his pockets filled with dollar bills. I discovered later that this
man was a store keeper in Harlem, who had picked up a large supply of
spring hats at a bankruptcy sale and stating that it was “hot stuff”
had proceeded to sell it not openly in his store, but sub rosa in
private places.

There is no limit to the “hot man’s” supply or the variety of goods he
offers. One can, if one knows the ropes, buy any article of wearing
apparel from him. And in addition to the professional “hot man” there
are always the shoplifters and thieving store clerks, who accost you
secretly and eagerly place at your disposal what they have stolen.

Hence low salaried folk in Harlem dress well, and Seventh Avenue is a
fashionable street crowded with expensively dressed people, parading
around in all their “hot” finery. A cartoonist in a recent issue of one
of the Negro monthlies depicted the following scene: A number of people
at a fashionable dance are informed that the police have come to search
for some individual known to be wearing stolen goods. Immediately there
is a confused and hurried exodus from the room because all of the
dancers present were arrayed in “hot stuff.”

This, of course, is exaggerated. There are thousands of well-dressed
people in Harlem able to be well-dressed not because they patronize a
“hot man,” but because their incomes make it possible. But there are a
mass of people, working for small wages, who make good use of the “hot
man,” for not only can they buy their much wanted finery cheaply, but,
thanks to the obliging “hot man,” can buy it on the installment plan.
Under the circumstances, who cares about breaking the law?




VII. THE NEGRO AND THE CHURCH


The Negro in America has always supported his religious institutions
even though he would not support his schools or business enterprises.
Migrating to the city has not lessened his devotion to religious
institutions even if it has lessened his religious fervor. He still
donates a portion of his income to the church, and the church is still
a major social center in all Negro communities.

Harlem is no exception to this rule, and its finest buildings are the
churches. Their attendance is large, their prosperity amazing. Baptist,
Methodist, Episcopal, Catholic, Presbyterian, Seventh Day Adventist,
Spiritualist, Holy Roller and Abyssinian Jew--every sect and every
creed with all their innumerable subdivisions can be found in Harlem.

The Baptist and the Methodist churches have the largest membership.
There are more than a score of each. St. Phillips Episcopal Church is
the most wealthy as well as one of the oldest Negro churches in New
York. It owns a great deal of Harlem real estate and was one of the
leading factors in urging Negroes to buy property in Harlem.

There are few new church buildings, most of them having been bought
from white congregations when the Negro invaded Harlem and claimed
it for his own. The most notable of the second-hand churches are the
Metropolitan Baptist Church at 128th Street and Seventh Avenue, Salem
M. E. Church at 129th Street and Seventh Avenue, and Mt. Olive Baptist
Church at 120th Street and Lenox Avenue. This latter church has had
a varied career. It was first a synagogue, then it was sold to white
Seventh Day Adventists and finally fell into its present hands.

The most notable new churches are the Abyssinian Baptist Church on
138th Street, Mother Zion on 137th Street, and St. Marks. The latter
church has just recently been finished. It is a dignified and colossal
structure occupying a triangular block on Edgecombe and St. Nicholas
Avenues between 137th and 138th Streets. It is the latest thing in
churches, with many modern attachments--gymnasium, swimming pool,
club rooms, Sunday school quarters, and other sub-auditoriums. When
it was formally opened there was a gala dedication week to celebrate
the occasion. Each night services were held by the various secret
societies, the Elks, the Masons, the Knights of Pythias, the Odd
Fellows, and others. The members of every local chapter of the various
orders turned out to do homage to the new edifice. The collection
proceeds were donated to the church.

St. Marks goes in for elaborate ceremony quite reminiscent of the
Episcopal or Roman Catholic service. The choir is regaled in flowing
robes and chants hymns by Handel. The pulpit is a triumph of carving
and wood decoration. There is more ceremony than sermon.

The better class of Harlemites attends the larger churches. Most of the
so-called “dictys” are registered as “Episcopalians” at St. Phillips,
which is the religious sanctum of the socially elect and wealthy
Negroes of Harlem. The congregation at St. Phillips is largely mulatto.
This church has a Parish House that serves as one of the most ambitious
and important social centers in Harlem. It supports a gymnasium that
produces annually a first-class basket ball team, an art sketch class
that is both large and promising, and other activities of interest and
benefit to the community.

Every Sunday all of the churches are packed, and were they run entirely
on the theatrical plan they would hang out the S. R. O. sign. No
matter how large they are they do not seem to be large enough. And in
addition to these large denominational churches there are many smaller
ones also crowded, and a plethora of outlaw sects, ranging from Holy
Rollers to Black Jews and Moslems.

The Holy Rollers collect in small groups of from twenty-five to one
hundred and call themselves various things. Some are known as the
Saints of God in Christ, others call themselves members of the Church
of God and still others call themselves Sanctified Children of the
Holy Ghost. Their meetings are primitive performances. Their songs and
chants are lashing to the emotions. They also practice healing, and,
during the course of their services, shout and dance as erotically and
sincerely as savages around a jungle fire.

The Black Jews are a sect migrated from Abyssinia. Their services
are similar to those in a Jewish Synagogue only they are of a lower
order, for these people still believe in alchemy and practice polygamy
when they can get away with it. Just recently a group of them were
apprehended by agents from the Department of Justice for establishing a
free love farm in the State of New Jersey. They were all citizens of
Harlem and had induced many young Negro girls to join them.

The Mohammedans are beginning to send missionaries to work among
Negroes in America. Already they have succeeded in getting enough
converts in Harlem, Chicago, St. Louis and Detroit to establish mosques
in these cities. There are about one hundred and twenty-five active
members of the Mohammedan church in Harlem, practicing the precepts of
the Koran under the leadership of an Islamic missionary.

The Spiritualist churches also thrive in Harlem. There are about
twenty-five or more of their little chapels scattered about. They enjoy
an enormous patronage from the more superstitious, ignorant classes.
The leaders of the larger ones make most of their money from white
clients, who drop in regularly for private sessions.




VIII. NEGRO JOURNALISM IN HARLEM


The Harlem Negro owns, publishes, and supports five local weekly
newspapers. These papers are just beginning to influence Harlem thought
and opinion. For a long time they were merely purveyors of local gossip
and scandal. Now some of them actually have begun to support certain
issues for the benefit of the community and to cry out for reforms in
the regulation journalistic manner.

For instance, _The New York Age_, which is the oldest Negro weekly in
New York, has been conducting a publicity campaign against numbers
and saloons. These saloons are to this paper as unwelcome a Harlem
institution as the numbers. Each block along the main streets has at
least one saloon, maybe two or three. They are open affairs, save
instead of calling themselves saloons, they call themselves cafes. To
get in is an easy matter. One has only to approach the door and look at
a man seated on a box behind the front window, who acknowledges your
look by pulling a chain which releases a bolt on the door. Once in you
order what you wish from an old fashioned bartender and stand before an
old-fashioned bar with a brass rail, mirrors, pictures, spittoons, and
everything. What is more, they even have ladies’ rooms in the rear.

The editor of _The New York Age_, in the process of conducting his
crusade, published the addresses of all these saloons and urged that
they be closed. The result of his campaign was that they are still open
and doing more business than ever, thanks to his having informed people
where they were located.

At first glance any of the Harlem newspapers give one the impression
that Harlem is a hotbed of vice and crime. They smack of the tabloid
in this respect and should be considered accordingly. True, there is
vice and crime in Harlem as there is in any community where living
conditions are chaotic and crowded.

For instance, there are 110 Negro women in Harlem for every 100 Negro
men. Sixty and six-tenths percent of them are regularly employed. This,
according to social service reports, makes women cheap, and conversely
I suppose makes men expensive. Anyway there are a great number of
youths and men who are either wholly or partially supported by single
or married women. These male parasites, known as sweetbacks, dress well
and spend their days standing on street corners, playing pool, gambling
and looking for some other “fish” to aid in their support. This is
considered by some an alarming condition inasmuch as many immigrant
youths from foreign countries and rural southern American districts
naturally inclined to be lazy, think that it is smart and citified to
be a parasite and do almost anything in order to live without working.

The newspapers of Harlem seldom speak of this condition, but their
headlines give eloquent testimony to the results, with their reports
of gun play, divorce actions (and in New York State there is only one
ground for divorce) and brick-throwing parties. These conditions are
magnified, of course, by proximity, and really are not important at all
when the whole vice and crime situation in greater New York is taken
under consideration.

To return to the newspapers, _The Negro World_ is the official
organ of the Garvey Movement. At one time it was one of the most
forceful weeklies among Negroes. Now it has little life or power; its
life-giving mentor, Marcus Garvey, being in Atlanta Federal Prison. Its
only interesting feature is the weekly manifesto Garvey issues from his
prison sanctum, urging his followers to remain faithful to the cause
and not fight among themselves while he is kept away from them.

_The Amsterdam News_ is the largest and most progressive Negro
weekly published in Harlem. It, like all of its contemporaries, is
conservative in politics and policy, but it does feature the work
of many of the leading Negro journalists and has the most forceful
editorial page of the group, even if it does believe that most of the
younger Negro artists are “bad New Negroes.”

_The New York News_ is a political sheet, affecting the tabloid form.
_The Tattler_ is a scandal sheet. It specializes in personalities and
theatrical and sport news.




IX. THE NEW NEGRO


Harlem has been called the center of the American Negroes’ cultural
renaissance and the mecca of the New Negro. If this is so, it is so
only because Harlem is a part of New York, the cultural and literary
capital of America. And Harlem becomes the mecca of the so-called
New Negro only because he imagines that once there he can enjoy the
cultural contact and intellectual stimulation necessary for his growth.

This includes the young Negro writer who comes to Harlem in order to
be near both patrons and publishers of literature, and the young Negro
artist and musician who comes to Harlem in order to be near the most
reputable artistic and musical institutions in the country.

These folk, along with the librarians employed at the Harlem Branch
of the New York Public Library, a few of the younger, more cultured
professional men and women and the school teachers, who can be found in
the grammar and high schools all over the city, constitute the Negro
intelligentsia. This group is sophisticated and small and more a part
of New York’s life than of Harlem’s. Its members are accepted as social
and intellectual equals among whites downtown, and can be found at
informal and formal gatherings in any of the five boroughs that compose
greater New York. Harlem to most of them is just a place of residence;
they are not “fixed” there as are the majority of Harlem’s inhabitants.

Then there are the college youngsters and local intellectuals, whose
prototypes can be found in any community. These people plan to attend
lectures and concerts, given under the auspices of the Y. M. C. A.,
Y. W. C. A., churches, and public school civic centers. They are
the people who form intercollegiate societies, who stage fraternity
go-to-school campaigns, who attend the course of lectures presented by
the Harlem Branch of the New York Public Library, during the winter
months, and who frequent the many musical and literary entertainments
given by local talent in Harlem auditoriums.

Harlem is crowded with such folk. The three great major educational
institutions of New York, Columbia, New York University and the College
of the City of New York, have a large Negro student attendance.
Then there are many never-will-be-top-notch literary, artistic and
intellectual strivers in Harlem as there are all over New York. Since
the well advertised “literary renaissance,” it is almost a Negro
Greenwich Village in this respect. Every other person one meets is
writing a novel, a poem or a drama. And there is seemingly no end to
artists who do oils, pianists who pound out Rachmaninoff’s Prelude in
C Sharp Minor, and singers, with long faces and rolling eyes, who sing
spirituals.




X. HARLEM--MECCA OF THE NEW NEGRO


Harlem, the so-called citadel of Negro achievement in the New World,
the alleged mecca of the New Negro and the advertised center of colored
America’s cultural renaissance. Harlem, a thriving black city, pulsing
with vivid passions, alive with colorful personalities, and packed with
many types and classes of people.

Harlem is a dream city pregnant with wide-awake realities. It is a
masterpiece of contradictory elements and surprising types. There is
no end to its versatile presentation of people, personalities and
institutions. It is a mad medley.

There seems to be no end to its numerical and geographical growth. It
is spreading north, east, south and west. It is slowly pushing beyond
the barriers imposed by white people. It is slowly uprooting them from
their present homes in the near vicinity of Negro Harlem as it has
uprooted them before. There must be expansion and Negro Harlem is too
much a part of New York to remain sluggish and still while all around
is activity and expansion. As New York grows, so will Harlem grow. As
Negro America progresses, so will Negro Harlem progress.

New York is now most liberal. There is little racial conflict, and
there have been no inter-racial riots since the San Juan Hill days. The
question is will the relations between New York Negro and New York
white man always remain as tranquil as they are today? No one knows,
and once in Harlem one seldom cares, for the sight of Harlem gives any
Negro a feeling of great security. It is too large and too complex to
seem to be affected in any way by such a futile thing as race prejudice.

There is no typical Harlem Negro as there is no typical American
Negro. There are too many different types and classes. White, yellow,
brown and black and all the intervening shades. North American, South
American, African and Asian; Northerner and Southerner; high and
low; seer and fool--Harlem holds them all, and strives to become a
homogeneous community despite its motley hodge-podge of incompatible
elements, and its self-nurtured or outwardly imposed limitations.

[Illustration:

  E. HALDEMAN-JULIUS
  Editor
  LITTLE BLUE BOOKS
]


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.
Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

The table of contents was corrected to match the chapter headers and
their page numbers.

Spelling has been retained as originally published except for the
corrections below.

  Page 11: “the most artistocratic”        “the most aristocratic”
  Page 16: “the Carribean regions”         “the Caribbean regions”
  Page 18: “bitter antagonism existant”    “bitter antagonism existent”



